1. In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.
2. Everything in the heavens and the earth praises God. He is the Almighty, the Wise.
3. O you who believe! Why do you say what you do not do?
4. It is most hateful to God that you say what you do not do.
5. God loves those who fight in His cause, in ranks, as though they were a compact structure.
6. When Moses said to his people, "O my people, why do you hurt me, although you know that I am God's Messenger to you?" And when they swerved, God swerved their hearts. God does not guide the sinful people.
7. And when Jesus son of Mary said, "O Children of Israel, I am God's Messenger to you, confirming what preceded me of the Torah, and announcing good news of a messenger who will come after me, whose name is Ahmad." But when he showed them the miracles, they said, "This is obvious sorcery."
8. And who is a greater wrongdoer than he who attributes falsehoods to God, when he is being invited to Islam? God does not guide the wrongdoing people.
9. They want to extinguish God's Light with their mouths; but God will complete His Light, even though the disbelievers dislike it.
10. It is He who sent His Messenger with the guidance and the true religion, to make it prevail over all religions, even though the idolaters dislike it.
11. O you who believe! Shall I inform you of a trade that will save you from a painful torment?
12. That you believe in God and His Messenger, and strive in the cause of God with your possessions and yourselves. That is best for you, if you only knew.
13. He will forgive you your sins; and will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow, and into beautiful mansions in the Gardens of Eden. That is the supreme success.
14. And something else you love: support from God, and imminent victory. So give good news to the believers.
15. O you who believe! Be supporters of God, as Jesus son of Mary said to the disciples, "Who are my supporters towards God?" The disciples said, "We are God's supporters." So a group of the Children of Israel believed, while another group disbelieved. We supported those who believed against their foe, so they became dominant.